hello my name is ava Martinek and I
would like to tell you a story about the
cinema for the blind this expression
cinema for the blind can be associated
with another enclosed space another
ghetto for disabled people and this is
exactly the situation we would like to
avoid in our opinion cinema should be a
meeting place I mean the universal
multi-dimensional meaning of the world a
meeting as a shared contact on equal
terms it's also a meeting of two
different words people able to
experience images and people without
disability and from the beginning it
became clear for us that this division
is very apparent the division between
people able and unable to experience
images and we believe that thanks to the
magic of the desire of the similar such
an experience can become something
extraordinary something even something
mystical and the question was what is
disability and we knew that whole I that
whole idea of disability will be tested
and it will be transformed with the
confrontation of reality my today's talk
is related to the cinema cinema so we
thought that the story we wanted to tell
you the story about the cinema for the
blind could be narrated in their own
dramatic structure as claimed screenplay
structure so its name now time for act 1
introduction every story has at the
beginning for us it was the first
contact with subject of audio
description
as a cultural institution we took part
in a conference in or so devoted to the
question how to help blind people and
expand their access to culture at this
meeting in war so we met two people
Basha and Tomic with whom we cooperate
until today Basha and tomica involved in
popularization of audio description they
they travel around the country teaching
and talking about all the description
and they both are blind so they are very
brave they travel alone and everything
they can count us is human kindness
after meeting Boche and Tomac we just
wanted to know whether our concept of
the cinema for the blind will it succeed
at all and where will it lead us so now
it's time for act 2 rising action it was
time for an effective action for us we
already knew what we wanted and how to
do it first we didn't want the cinema
only for the blind and the priority for
us was integration we believed that the
integration is the most important thing
in this meeting in the cinema and second
we knew that we have a problem because
an audio description can become
something like invasion in the comfort
of the audience reception for site
people audio description can become
something like unwanted guest who
appeared uninvited and destroy their
relaxing time in the cinema so the only
way to provide comfort to all
participants of the film projection with
a camouflage audio description if you
know something about audio description
you know that this test technique is to
describe everything lector based on a
previously prepared script describes
everything from general to specific
without judging or valuing
and now I will explain to you how it
works the audi description so in the
cinema there is a lector who is located
in a soundproof room and all the out on
the audience people had headphones with
ER receivers or radio receivers it
doesn't matter so during the lift
projection led to read the text the
audio script which and lectures voice
receives to the audience without
disturbing the rest of the people so
sorry until this day we have managed to
show only one film on DVD it was our
great success I must say because
creating an audio description as a very
tedious and time-consuming job but I was
talking about this technical
requirements but it's not really a
problem in our story it was just a basic
conflict followed by subsequent various
problems obstacles and and risk that
frustrated our attempt to reach the goal
first big real big complication was
appeared between us and film
distributors because in Poland audio
description is something new very new so
it's also very problematic for lawyers
for law also for copyrights problems and
so in Poland there are not enough legal
regulation to provide audio description
there is not enough earning standards
and not enough procedures not enough
verification the verifications system is
not not as it should be and and the most
important the audio description is not
something like thunder
it's not standardized and I either as I
suggested earlier it was pretty for a
pretty hard to convince the sighted part
of the audience that they are dealing
with no Muslim not a strange kind of
film for disabled not a really different
kind of film for blind people those who
risked and participated in our film
projection wasn't disappointed at all
they were grateful and just before the
third act will take place I must admit
that the that we betrayed the classic
screen pay structure we never succumb to
despair it's that moment in the story
when the weakness pervaiz over the faith
in success and the goal goal seems
unattainable hmm and now I will explain
how it works for us as Anna organized a
tour and it's easy if you if you want to
go to a film premiere you simply buy a
ticket to cinema a blind person doesn't
have this possibility doesn't have this
possibility and if you are an organized
a Terr even if you have found a cinema
which has necessary equipment like
headphones like we are or radio
receivers like a special room of
soundproof room for Lecter even if you
have found that and even if you have
found a lector who will read the text
during live projection and even if you
have found a experience I mean very
experienced person who made a script for
the film even if you have found these
three elements you still need to wait at
least six months for first DVD release
because as I say I area and
they're creating of audio description is
a very tedious and time-consuming job it
can only work with DVD copy and and
think about that what with the films
which will never appeared on a DVD at
all the blind people won't experience
them at all so in short the blind people
do not have access to current cinema
repertoire at all and the blind people
do not have access to access to complete
some heritage and next next complication
was surprising for us because it turned
out that the most of blind people in
Poland have no idea what audio
description is and how it works and it's
now a time for act three clients and
after a few projections and we began to
receive a first phone calls with
questions when do you plan to do another
audit projection with audio description
it was a great feeling for us first
major Sun that our projections are
popular and our viewers began to inform
each other and i must say that very
important was for us was the next sign
because our viewers came outside the
broad swath and they cover over 150
miles one way to spend all only two
hours indian cinema I must repeat that
because 150 miles one way to spend only
two hours in the cinema it shows how
important the cinema and the film is for
them so for first for first signs that
our work was good we waited almost a
year but now we know what it was warford
and
we host visitors from different part of
Lower Silesia in our cinema also we have
more friends more allies people for whom
audio description is a great passion and
in the end for the screenplay writer the
most important is to find the balance
and it's also our goal for us in our
story balance can be substituted by
another world oh sorry balance and
harmony can be substituted with another
word standardization and it's all we are
frightened for standardization it's it's
the way to provide audio description as
a normality to our life and our culture
culture and and the thing we always we
are talking about is that it should be
legal social and cultural
standardization and and thinking about
audio description as a normality and
standardization provide equal access to
cultural heritage thank you but today
with me and also on the audience is
Marika Tula who I would like to
introduce you Eric please stand up
because
because is a one of the most involved
people in broad swath in creation of the
cinema for the blind he's an offer of
the scripts he invites people to our
Center to show them how audio
description works and to give them this
opportunity to watch all the description
and also last week he he's also a
lecturer in our cinemas so last week he
made our first audio description for a
theater production production so from
thanks to the people like Mark we can
really change this situation thank you
you